# New Hope\: A Theodramatic Approach to Trauma Healing  
Tricia and Stephen Stringer  
July 15, 2020  

# Introduction  

When the first man and woman disobeyed God in the garden, the perfect unity that existed was destroyed. Gaps formed between our heart \(emotions\), mind \(thinking\), body \(physical life\) and soul \(spiritual life\). The resulting discord affects all the relationships around us—causing gaps in the relationships we have with each other, with nature, and with God. Under normal circumstances, we learn to function in life more or less effectively despite these gaps, but additional trauma fractures us to the point that those gaps in our lives may seem impassible.   

We inhabit a world in a particular time that includes our fellow human beings, our community, and our nation. God’s words and actions throughout history purpose to bring God’s Kingdom on earth, as it is in Heaven, in perfect unity \(God’s theodrama\). God’s plan has always been that we participate fully and perfectly in his theodrama. In a perfect world, our hearts, souls, minds, and bodies work together in harmony, enabling us to participate fully in the theodrama. In order for us to experience unity within ourselves, we need to bridge the gaps that have formed between the parts of ourselves that no longer function well together. This inward unity facilitates restored relationships we have with each other, with nature, and with God. This restoration finds its consummation in God’s eternal kingdom.  

New Hope is designed to help close the gaps and equip people who have experienced trauma find their purpose by participating fittingly in God’s theodrama. New Hope combines biblical narrative with personal narratives and healing activities in a healing community to bring unity to those broken inner parts of us.   



# Why is Narrative, and Narrative in Community, Important in Trauma Work?  
Cognitive scientists and psychologists have laid the groundwork for the importance of using narrative in trauma work.   
Trauma  
Trauma definitions are varied. Although the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual \(DSM-5 2013, 271\) has required the definition of trauma to include “actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence,” some mental health professionals broaden that definition. New Hope uses a broad definition of trauma\: any highly stressful experience that causes negative consequences mentally, emotionally, physically, or spiritually. In this way we do not 1\) give the impression that we are training trauma counselors, and 2\) do not turn away those who are carrying any kind of hurt that affects them daily. In some cases, especially in those of complex trauma, mental health professionals need to be involved in the trauma healing process. However, some psychologists working among refugees agree that the majority of refugee children and their families will “manifest resilience and not need specialized psychiatric services” \(Brymer et. al. 2008, 627\). New Hope does not attempt to offer a replacement of good mental health practices for those who need professional care. It does offer a structure for an on-going healing community. This is important because in the last stages of recovery, participants benefit from on-going interpersonal groups to help them re-integrate into the broader world \(Herman 2015, 234-235\).   

*New Hope does not train counselors, and it does not replace professional mental health care.*  

Trauma widens the gaps that already exist between heart, soul, mind, and body to the point that normal coping mechanisms are no longer sufficient. In trauma our emotions take over and we no longer feel in control of our reactions. When we experience trauma or high stress, the logical and the emotional parts of our brain no longer communicate well with each other. The emotional part of our brain is made up of the “reptilian brain” \(coordinates the functioning of the life-sustaining systems of our body\) and the limbic system \(the seat of emotions, monitors what is important to survival\). Although the limbic system develops the most in the first 6 years of life, it continues to be shaped by its environment and is greatly impacted by trauma. Senses enter our brains through one part of the limbic system \(the thalamus\) which then sends them to the amygdala controlling fundamental survival and emotion senses.   

The information is also relayed to our frontal lobes \(our “rational brain”\), but it takes a few milliseconds longer. The rational brain attaches meaning to information and helps re-balance our bodies, telling us if the senses coming in do or do not actually pose a threat to our life. The more intense the senses coming in, the more overwhelmed the limbic system becomes. Our rational brains become less able to process the information in order to re-balance us. In fact, our rational brains effectively go “off-line.” When these parts of our brain become unbalanced, we may get ‘stuck’ in emotional responses to stress or the perception/memory of that stress, and no amount of understanding or logic can re-balance us because the amygdala does not respond to logic. Stress hormones continue to propagate, and we continue to react in a certain way. Over time, those neural connections form deeper and deeper pathways until our unhealthy stress responses become entrenched \(Van Der Kolk 2015, 56-60\). However, it is the rational part of our brain that makes sense of our memories and emotions. It enables us to understand how the past relates to the present and the future \(integration of memories\). Processing of trauma must include both the emotional and rational parts of our brain \(Van Der Kolk 2015, 247\). How do we do this when trauma has effectively destroyed the connections between the two? Recent and on-going neuropsychological research suggests that narratives may help.  

Narrative in Trauma  
The most basic definition of narrative is that it is a series of actions and events that unfold over time, according to causal principles \(Mar 2004, 1415\). The causation, or discourse, of the narrative demands that events occur in a logically coherent order. Because trauma creates chaos, the skill of being able to organize personal narratives into a cohesive structure contributes significantly to healing of past trauma \(Mar 2004, 1414\). Therefore it may also be possible to understand where someone is in their healing journey by the coherence of the personal narrative they tell \(Frank 2013, 102\). The prefrontal cortex is where narratives are processed, comprehended, and produced. This area helps us understand the narrative characters’ mental states. The processing of narratives, both the comprehension of them and the production of them, tend to center around the prefrontal cortex, our “rational brain” \(Mar 2004, 1418, 1422\). These are somewhat the same areas of the brain responsible for episodic and autobiographical memories—the record of a person’s experience of everyday events including time, feelings, and context \(Mar 2004, 1430\).  
Research about the use of narrative in trauma has largely centered around people telling their personal trauma narrative. However, narratives in general, unlike expository material, stimulate the emotions as well as provide cognitive stimulation \(Oatley 1999, 101-102\). We know that when listeners hear a story, especially one about a character with whom they can relate well, they experience the same emotions as that character. When a character runs in the story, the same neurons are activated as when we physically run. When a character is afraid or lonely or happy, the listener experiences similar brain activity—this is why certain movies make us sad or happy \(Heffernan 2017\). A recent Princeton University experiment may help explain that phenomenon; it showed that when a storyteller told a story to a listener who understands it, the same parts of the brain in the listener were activated as in the storyteller, specifically the frontal cortex which controls analytical and logical functions \(Stephens, Silbert, and Hasson 2010\). Narrative may not be the only oral form in which this happens; certain traditional rituals, drama, and other fictional forms were developed because they were found to have value for helping us integrate autobiographical memories into our present. These rituals “achieve their principal therapeutic value for emotions that have been too overwhelming for people to assimilate in ordinary life. These narrative forms prompt individuals to recall such devastating emotional circumstances and come to terms with them” \(from Scheff 1979 cited in Oatley 1999, 110\). Oatley postulates that “fictional” stories offer a kind of “laboratory” that enables the hearer to explore emotions in a safe environment \(Oatley 1999, 112\). People vicariously “embody” them in the narrative as they fully experience it. Although Oatley was speaking primarily about literary forms \(whether plays, movies, or written literature\), the Princeton experiment mentioned above would suggest that similar reactions would exist in more conversational stories communicated in person. People recall emotional circumstances in these safe “fictional” environments and then consistently work through them using drama, ritual, discussion, and re-telling. They learn over time that it is possible to safely address these emotions and work through them. Although genetics do contribute to how our brains work, Dr. Daniel Siegel hypothesizes that new neural connections can be formed as we experience new things over time \(Siegel and Solomon 2003, 5\). Perhaps as people experience these narrative forms safely over and over, new neural pathways can be formed as the same neural connections are made repeatedly.   
The Princeton research found that at times the listeners’ neurons fired, appropriately, slightly *ahead* of the action in the story because they anticipated the outcome \(Stephens, Silbert, and Hasson 2010\). We tell biblical stories chronologically, revealing repeating patterns of actions and reactions. Our listeners begin to see patterns in the outcomes of characters’ lives as God works in them. In addition, the participants participate in kinesthetic activities such as drama that help them more effectively enter into the emotions of the story. Is it possible that through this repetition they can begin to *anticipate* the outcome for the characters? As they anticipate the outcome for the characters, perhaps they can imagine themselves in similar outcomes. As they imagine similar outcomes for themselves, could outward behaviors also change, strengthening new neural pathways?  
Narrative in Community  
Judith Hermann reminds us that “The core experiences of psychological trauma are disempowerment and disconnection from others” \(Herman 2015, 133\). This is what makes embodied narrative experienced *in community* effective for long-lasting transformation. Diane Langberg says that those living with ongoing trauma need community even before they tell their individual stories \(Langberg 2015, Loc 2509\). In fact, “ongoing connection and community” is one of “three things \[which\] are vital in the midst of trauma” \(Langberg 2015, Loc 2552\).Therefore, recovery involves a community, but not just any community—one that develops cohesion, intimacy, and generosity of compassion. When groups have that, “a complex mirroring process comes into play. As each participant extends herself to others, she becomes more capable of receiving the gifts that others have to offer. The tolerance, compassion, and love she grants to others begin to rebound upon herself….\[this\] occurs most powerfully in the context of a group” \(Hermann 2015, 215-216\). Perhaps even here, in healing community, new neural pathways are being formed as safe interactions occur again and again.   
As we repeatedly listen to and encourage production of both personal and biblical stories in the midst of an ongoing and safe community, it may be that both our rational and emotional brains are being activated. Building new and healthier neural pathways allows us to process trauma more effectively.  
Can a theodramatic approach to trauma help us accomplish this task of forging new neural pathways in the brain so that people are released to rightly understand their own stories and set them within the framework of God’s larger story?   


# Why is Theodrama Important in Trauma Work?  
Theologian Hans Urs Balthasar coined the term *theo-drama* in his five-volume treatise *Theo-Drama\: Theological Dramatic Theory* \(Balthasar 1988\)*.* For Balthasar, God is the ultimate protagonist who has initiated a great redemption story. This theodrama of the Bible is a matter of what God, *theos*, has said and done, *draō*. It is the story of God’s interaction with this world and humanity. God is revealed through this theodrama as recorded in Scripture. God speaks to us through Scripture to enable us to seek him, find him, be restored, and be in community. God acted and continues to act through the theodrama to communicate his love for us and his desire for relationship with us. As such, the goal of theodrama is our participation in God’s communicative action, his word-deeds and deed-words \(Vanhoozer 2010, 282–83\). Theodrama moves beyond narrative in that it enables participation and invites relationship with the Triune God. It encourages community with the other players on the theodramatic stage. Theodrama is therefore a particularly helpful model for trauma work in that it initiates healing communities, instills faith by bringing us into communion with the Triune God, and imbues us with purpose as we embody the theodrama through fitting participation.  


Initiating Community through Theodrama  

Humanity takes its place on the stage of the theodrama\: in acting out the theodrama, we no longer simply indwell the world of the story but we are conformed to the story thereby being transformed by it \(Wolterstorff 2001\). This performance is not done in isolation. Just as the theodrama invites participation in the divine communion, it also creates a holy community of believers \(John 17\:21-3\). Theodramatic communities operate much like theatrical companies who work together using both past traditions and present communities to understand a script. In the case of theodrama, the theodrama is represented by the biblical text; the biblical text is faithfully performed by the church in community \(Craigo‐Snell 2000, 479\). New Hope takes an oral approach in sharing carefully crafted biblical stories in healing communities.   


Instilling Faith through Theodrama  

“We all live story-shaped lives. The issue is not whether we will do so; the issue is rather which are the stories that will shape our lives?…the story that most decisively shapes our lives must be the biblical story.” \(Wolterstorff 1995, 212\)  
The use of theodrama in trauma work avoids the pitfalls of Hegelian epic and lyric categories. Objectivist epic narrativists view narrative as historical accounts told by a detached, objective observer. The lyric narrativists view narrative as highly expressive and personal. For the lyricist, stories that count are personal and subjective. Hegel describes drama as an appropriate approach for combining the two. A theodramatic approach to narrative is also particularly helpful in theology. In his manifesto on *The Future of Christian Theology,* Ford \(2011\) considers Hegel’s typology in light of theology and identifies drama as the future of theology, “At its best, drama is able to embrace the objective and the subjective, to maintain a sense of plot and purpose without suppressing individuality, diversity, and the complexity of levels, perspectives, motivations, and ideas. It can have epic detachment and lyric intensity and enable a coherence without assuming one overview” \(Ford 2011, 26\).  

Theodrama brings the discursive nature of the biblical narrative to center-stage. The triune God is the author and primary actor in the drama. People are not only the audience for the story/theodrama, but they embody the drama by becoming a part of the theodrama. These actors understand and trust the biblical narrative as the theodrama is performed \(Vander Lugt 2014, 19\). The subject of theodrama is the Triune God in communicative action. The triune union of God is progressively revealed through the theodrama, and the *telos* of this emplotted narrative is that, through the gospel, humankind is invited to enter into this communion \(2005, 41–43\). As people who have experienced trauma live the theodrama, they engage the author and primary actor in the theodrama. Entering into eternal relationship with the Triune God is the foundation of our faith and is an essential component of trauma work.   


Imbuing Purpose through Theodrama  

The task of drama is to build worlds and indwell them. The world most worthy of indwelling is the world created by God’s theodrama as revealed through the Bible. The theodrama is the emplotted story of the Bible*,* and the hero of the theodrama is the Triune God in communicative action. Embodying this story then involves theodramatic participation in communion within the Trinity. The indwelling of the biblical story becomes the interpretive key to life and godliness. The fundamental form of Scripture interpretation is the ongoing faithful performance of the theodrama. Scripture is in fact ‘rendered’ through the lived performance of the church \(Lash 1986, 42\).   

Theodrama relies upon logical coherence and consistency but cannot be reduced to it. Its primary concern is helping disciples better understand the theodramatic plot\: how God’s plan conceived before the foundation of the world is now being worked out through the incarnation and the disciples’ fitting participation in the theodrama. Christian disciples are to embody the message of the Christian theodrama\: through Christ and his salvation we are brought into eternal communion with the Triune God. Just as the stage becomes a new reality for the actors walking upon it, so too does the new life in Christ. When we see ourselves as participants in this eternal theodrama, we are given a renewed sense of meaning and purpose in life. To be sure, life is fraught with complexities, tragedies, and seemingly catastrophic plot twists \(Quash 2005, 3-5\). Despite this the Christian theodrama is always, ever moving towards a glorious end, and we are called to perform our roles in it \(Wright 1992, 121\). This is our theodramatic, thus Christocentric, *hope* as well as our eschatological *purpose*.    


# New Hope as a theodramatic framework to address trauma  
A Healing Environment\: Community, Faith, and Purpose  
“A cord of three strands is not quickly broken” \(Ecc. 4\:12, NIV\). The writer of Ecclesiastes knew that three strands of anything is much stronger than just two. Three principles are vital for healing environments to exist\: community, faith, and purpose \(Langberg 2015, Loc 2552\). A trilogy of stories woven together in this healing environment—our story, God’s Story, and God’s stories shared---is the tri-part cord that makes New Hope sessions powerful.   
Each session structures these three principles by dividing the sessions into *Looking Back, Looking Up, and Looking Forward.* In the *Looking Back* portion of the session, participants share how their week went when they shared the previous Bible story, and they share part of their personal stories with each other. Because the meta-narrative of New Hope is grounded in Joseph’s story from Genesis, the participants learn his story in Session 1 and re-visit it each session, journeying through different parts of his life in conjunction with similar situations in their own. In the *Looking Up* section of the session, participants interact with a Bible story set within the overarching meta-narrative. In the *Looking Forward* section of the session, participants articulate the vision statement together in agreed hope\:   
*Is it possible that we could come to see things the way Joseph did when he said to those who had hurt him, “Do not be afraid. You meant to harm me, but God used what has happened for good—not just for me—but so that many other people could be saved.” \(based on Genesis 50\:20, NLT\)*  
Purpose becomes ‘real’ when participants realize that this is about more than just hearing, but about passing on the comfort they have received. The following week in the *Looking Back* section the community celebrates the multiplied healing brought through the participants sharing the Bible stories with others, strengthening their sense of purpose both individually and as a group.  
**Our Story *\(Looking Back\)*\: Building Community**   
Sharing one’s personal story of pain in a safe environment is integral to healing. Storytelling \(one’s own story\) is a way of ‘restoring a sense of efficacy and power” and reverses the “helplessness that constitutes the essential insult of trauma” \(Batchelor 2015, 193, comments on Herman 2015, 41\). One New Hope participant confirmed that learning biblical stories in a traditional Bible study is not enough for healing. She said, “…Even believers…are serving the Lord and maybe they know the \[Bible\] story but they didn’t be healed inside. But in this training you share your pain with others” \(interview with New Hope participant in North Africa, January 2020\). However, “Bad storytelling \[personal stories\] or unregulated telling replicates trauma” \(Langberg 2015, Loc 2545\). Safe environments for sharing are necessary so that participants are not re-traumatized by sharing their stories too early, before they are ready, or by other participants who try to give advice or judge. Sometimes people do not know where to start telling their stories, are afraid to share with someone they do not know, or telling their entire story in one sitting is too overwhelming. Pushing people to share before they are ready makes people uncomfortable or even may bring back traumatic memories to the point that they are re-traumatized as past negative feelings re-surface.  
The first goal of New Hope is to create an open, safe environment for every participant. New Hope does not create a classroom-like environment in which participants feel they need to give “correct” answers. To begin, facilitators guide participants through a “healing journey” role-play. In each stage of the healing journey participants are asked how they tend to feel in that stage. For example, when something difficult happens, we ask, “How do you typically feel immediately after something difficult happens?” We use the analogy of picking up a heavy burden. As each person states their own experiences, they are validated. Then we move on to the next stage by saying something like, “After about one month, how does the heavy burden feel?” As participants talk about being tired and wanting to put down the burden but not being able to, they begin to realize for themselves how these physical reactions often mirror their emotional reactions. They consider for themselves the kinds of things people may do in this stage of healing. Their emotions are validated as they see that everyone walks a similar emotional journey. Even from the first few minutes of Session 1, participants reconstruct and discover for themselves what it looks like to heal from trauma, rather than being taught information about trauma.   
The second session continues similarly—participants learn a simple method of listening, and they are asked to share a good story from their lives—whatever story they want to tell and including whatever details they want to include.   
It is not until the third session that participants are asked to begin sharing past stories of hurt. By this time, they have experienced several activities together. Even then, when participants share a story about when things began to go badly, they are not asked to share the entire story, and they are given a time limit \(this varies from culture to culture as appropriate\). Participants promise each other two things before they start listening to each other\: 1\) I will not share this story outside of the group, and 2\) I will not give advice! Each participant promises this in front of the entire group—the community continues to strengthen as they fulfill the promises together.  
As the sessions progress, different parts of participants’ personal stories are highlighted. Each listening prompt is vague enough that participants can share as little or as much as they would like. No listener is permitted to ask more than the basic three listening questions\:  
• What happened?  
• How did you/do you feel?  
• What was the hardest/worst/best part of that for you?  
In most New Hope groups, participants begin to feel more comfortable after the third or fourth session. The listening pairs often become friends and keep in touch between sessions. Participants seem to enjoy the uninterrupted time of talking to someone else about what worries them. And even in this section of the session, participants begin to help others just by listening\: just as they are listened to for the first half of the listening time, they will then listen to their partner in the second half.  
It is this dialog in New Hope groups that builds confidence and true community. One participant said\:  
Before I took this training, I didn’t have confidence by myself…when I saw the trainers I was praying and crying because…I think they are really holy people. All the time, I cry to God, “I just want to be like these people—please help me.” And God showed me…all of \[these people\] have the same problems like \[me\]…\[Now\] I am new—I am not counting who I \[was\] before because now I have confidence to talk to other people. I am not the only one who has a problem—everyone has a problem. Jesus he makes me free. \(interview with New Hope participant in North Africa, January 2020\)  
Building community happens throughout the entire session\: Participants work together in the *Looking Up* section to reconstruct the bible story together. They act out the story and discuss it with each other. They actively engage in a healing activity that engages them either individually or as a community “team.” Even the individual activities are debriefed in the group creating a sense that, in the group, everyone journeys together towards healing. For example, in the first session, participants draw a picture of their journey of healing and share together what it is like to think about their personal journeys.  
**God’s Story *\(Looking Up\)*\: Building Faith**  
Does a loving, listening community alone engender healing? Participants regularly say things like, “I have been released from my problems after sharing them with others.” Release is just the first step, however, in full healing. Just as we know simply telling bible stories is not enough, neither is simply telling our own stories. As participants consistently experience a safe listening environment, they begin to trust. This gives space for them to experience truth at a deeper level, hopefully leading to new neural connections and truly transformed thinking and behavior.   
Advice provides only a band-aid for the wound but embodying the theodrama changes the way we think and live. After participants tell personal stories, are listened to, and then listen to others’ stories, they hear a biblical story that relates to the subject they have just discussed with each other. They hear it twice, re-construct it by re-telling it as a group, and then act it out twice. These dramas are not just child’s-play. As people act out a story, they become the characters, experiencing the emotions of the characters in a safe way \(Oatley 1999, 112\). “When we act it out, we feel our heart what the story says. We like the dramas because we feel it what Joseph is passing”* *\(interview with New Hope participant in North Africa, January 2020\).  
The second time the participants act out the story they do not use words, and the actors are forced to show emotion in order to convey the action well. At significant points in the story, we stop the action and ask each character how they are feeling. The dramas in the New Hope session provide the “practice sessions” needed for participants to understand how these situations in God’s theodrama really work, and how they might respond in similar situations in their own lives. Faith becomes faith in the fullest sense of the word; not just a thought process, but a thought process that results in action based upon it. As participants begin to engage with the author and primary actor—the triune God—their relationship is restored and they can fittingly participate in the theodrama.   
Participants have the opportunity to discuss the story using five questions that lead them through a process of discovering *for themselves* the truths in the story\:  
• What did you like in this story?  
• What did you find difficult to accept in this story?  
• What does this story show us about God/Jesus/Holy Spirit?  
• What does this story show us about people?  
• If this story is true, how does it change your thinking, your behavior, or your attitude?  
The fifth question asked in this way, along with the acting out of the stories, allows the participants to ‘try on’ the truth of the story for the moment, even if they do not think they want to accept the truth long-term.   
We see that the 5 questions helped this woman ‘become’ Ruth and accept the truths in Ruth’s life as her own.  
So I said when we discussed about the 5 questions,…oh, ok, now I believe God he will help me. You see, Ruth…was not from that country. …We discussed about…how the people \[feel about this kind of woman in our area\]. I was the same with that woman. So now God he put her, Ruth, he put her in that top place, so I say, even God he’s today even he’s the same. He can do for me. \(January 2020\)  
One participant ‘tried on’ the truth of the Bleeding Woman story \(session 4, New Hope\). She decided to accept it!   
That acting, that acting, the story acting, still now comes in front of me. I am human being so sometimes I did mistake, sometimes I will sin, but God still he’s looking for me. But God still he’s looking for me, and he want me to say, “God I am here.” So he wants to hear that from me so I learn that thing the biggest thing for me so that helps me to be strong with God. \(January 2020\)  
**God’s Story Shared *\(Looking Forward\)*\: Building Purpose**  
In the *Looking Forward* section of a New Hope session, participants are asked who they might share the story with that week, and they are challenged to perform an act of kindness. They see that they have purpose in God’s theodrama. The act of articulating the story, in community, is an important physiological and emotional benchmark for participants to prove to themselves that they can do it. Just as psychologists tell us that telling a personal story is healing for the participants, so is telling a biblical story that has been embodied as a sort of personal story. We have found that the verbal “performance” of the biblical story in community contributes to the healing of the participants.  
Sharing with others then becomes a natural outpouring of renewed hope and purpose. One man who lived in a refugee camp in North Africa for 14 years had become a depressed, desperate alcoholic. He participated in a New Hope healing group, and said\:  
I was not this kind of person before…Now I have heart to help the others, the people like me. After that day I am looking for those kind of people and I will bring them and I will tell them how God helped me, what I did, he helped me. Now I have big heart for lost people and to tell them this way…What I get now also my friends they been healed. Because the first thing I have been healed and God gave me burden for these kind of people and most of them they’ve been healed so we are the same now. \(January 2020\)  
Misery may love company, but so does joy. In sharing joy, an individual’s confidence and the group’s community are strengthened. In the same camp another refugee says\:  
The first time what we teach, for example, what I teach that person, he learn, and now he’s leading the church. So now when I see that guy, God, he’s using us, so we feel we are important and we like each other to give our testimony for each other. \(January 2020\)  

A Re-constructed Narrative  
Our story, God’s story, and God’s-story-shared become a strongly woven tri-part cord. Our personal story finds purpose in the theodrama which shapes and guides our personal stories moving forward. God’s story becomes the consistent thread that holds together our lives’ tapestry. God himself becomes the weaver. In the last session of the initial New Hope healing group, participants are asked to imagine how God could use their pain to help others. As each of the seven previous sessions have given them more space to internalize truths, they begin to reconstruct a life narrative fully engaged in God’s theodrama. This is only the beginning—these groups now have the needed structure to continue meeting together.   
The below participant does not differentiate between her story and the biblical narrative. In her mind, she lives in the theodrama, and its truths are just as real to her as to the biblical characters. She refers to the Bleeding Woman story in Session 4 of New Hope and the Lost Son story in Session 1 of the Forgiveness Journey \(a sequel to the New Hope material\).  
But now God himself he came to look for the lost one and when we did the lost son I feel how God he loves us. He is the one who came to look for us. From that one I feel really God is my father. With the healing activities \[story visualization\] with bleeding woman and lost son at that time I feel that he is the real father. And even we feel we have many brothers but they didn’t come to look for us, but when we came back how he run to us and how he run to us and respect us and I feel he is a really good father. Still he looking for me still he loves me. I feel I like the most that part. After this training God completely he changed my heart and now I have to forgive the others and love the others. God he changed my life to love the others and to live even they don’t like me or want me I have to love them. \(January 2020\)  
As participants embody the theodrama, they can *anticipate* their own next actions.  

…Those people \[who\] hurt me if they came now how do I will act, I ask myself? Maybe if they \[come\] maybe they will say something more and they will go. But God still he’s with me. He’s taking who I am and what I’m doing inside. So I ask myself if they came just like Joseph’s brothers, when they came \[I think of\] the way he act. If they came, how…will I react, I ask myself. About Jesus--what he \[said\] on the cross because he forgive people. So after I learn that one I will never think about these people \[who\] hurt me. So I compare with Jesus his forgiveness and these people what they did to me. But Jesus he forgive us. He forgive me more. So you know all the time after we learn what Jesus say, ok, even what Joseph say, you \[intended\] to harm me, but God he change for good. Even Jesus he said in the cross, please forgive them they don’t know what they doing. So that thing he heals me. Now everything is gone. Now my heart is really clean. Everything is gone now. \(January 2020\)  

Healing continues as participants enter into God’s theodrama *themselves*, ready to live the next chapters of their lives within the overarching redemptive story.   

This Ruth and my story, it’s the same, it looks the same. When we discuss…the Ruth story, I used to see myself and I say for myself oh God, he give to Ruth all this chance, now you see how she is, so I decide for myself, ok, God if you use Ruth to be a mother for this, God he will use me. And I decide for myself and I start talking to the people. And now even the churches they choose me and they give me chance to serve the others, and now I’m not scared, and I will stand before anybody, and I start serving. \(January 2020\)  

None of this happens as a result of one magical trauma healing session or one “silver bullet” story. A trilogy of stories—ours, God’s, and the stories shared---turn like a wheel. And then the next trilogy of stories turns the wheel a bit more, moving forward inch by inch. Our lives are so complex, full of interwoven and overlapping stories, that we must be re-narrated into an equally complex narrative. This takes time and repetition. Oral audiences need repetition to believe a thing is true—and repeated practice is required for traumatized participants to change entrenched patterns of relationships \(Herman 2015, 234\). New neural pathways are formed, and age-old truths are fully appropriated and embodied.  

Just as healing from trauma is an on-going, iterative process, so are the methods used to address trauma. Theodrama may be a powerful and effective theological foundation for trauma work. It may also provide the appropriate framework for a healing environment in which our brains can heal physiologically also. More research and assessment is needed in theodramatic approaches to trauma work to measure its effectiveness on reducing post-traumatic consequences as well as its contribution to resilience in trauma survivors. As a theodramatic approach to trauma, New Hope has shown potential in that it initiates community, instills faith, and imbues purpose for people who have experienced trauma.  


# References  
American Psychiatric Association\: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. 2013. Arlington, VA.\: American Psychiatric Association.  
Balthasar, Hans Urs von. 1988. *Theo-Drama\: Theological Dramatic Theory, Vol. 2 The Dramatis Personae\: Man in God*. Kindle. Vol. 2. 5 vols. San Francisco\: Ignatius Press.  

Batchelor, Kathryn. 2015. “Orality, trauma theory and interlingual translation\: A study  
of repetition in Ahmadou Kourouma’s Allah n’est pas oblige.” *Translation Studies* 8\(2\)\: 191-208. http\://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14781700.2014.1001777.   
Brymer, Melissa J., Alan M. Steinberg, Jo Sornborger, Christopher M. Layne, and Robert S. Pynoos. 2008. “Acute Interventions for Refugee Children and Families.” *Child Adoloescent Psychiatric Clinic North America* 107\: 625-640.  
Craigo‐Snell, Shannon. 2000. “Command Performance\: Rethinking Performance Interpretation in the Context of Divine Discourse.” *Modern Theology* 16 \(4\)\: 475–94. https\://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0025.00142.  

Ford, David. 2011. *The Future of Christian Theology*. Blackwell Manifestos. Oxford ; Malden, MA\: Wiley-Blackwell.  
Frank, Arthur W. 2013. *The Wounded Storyteller.* Chicago\: The University of Chicago Press.  
Heffernan, Micheal. February 23, 2017. Tales for Tadpoles. “The Power of Storytelling and How it Affects Your Brain.” News. Accessed May 23, 2020. https\://talesfortadpoles.ie/blogs/news/the-power-of-storytelling-and-how-it-affects-your-brain.   
Herman, Judith, M.D. 2015. *Trauma and Recovery.* New York\: Basic Books.  
Hill, Harriet, et.al. 2013. *Healing the Wounds of Trauma\: How the Church Can Help.* New York\: American Bible Society.  
Kim, Kyu Bo. 2016. “Embracing Trauma in Theodrama\: Embodying Christiformity.” PhD diss., The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.  
Kubler-Ross. 1969. *On Death and Dying.* New York\: Macmillan.   
Langberg, Diane. 2015. *Suffering and the Heart of God\: How Trauma Destroys and Christ Restores.* Greensboro, NC\: New Growth Press. Kindle.  
Lash, Nicholas. 1986. *Theology on the Way to Emmaus*. London\: SCM Press.  
Mar, Raymond. 2004. “The neuropsychology of narrative\: story comprehension, story production and their interrelation.” *Neuropsychologia* 42, issue 10\: 1414-1434. https\://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/neuropsychologia/vol/42/issue/10.  
Oatley, Keith. 1999. “Why Fiction May Be Twice as True as Fact\: Fiction as Cognitive and Emotional Simulation.” *Review of General Psychology* Vol. 3, No. 2\: 101-117.  
Quash, Ben. 2005. *Theology and the Drama of History.* Cambridge\: Cambridge University Press.  
Scheff, T. J. 1979. *Catharsis in healing, ritual, and drama.* Berkeley\: University of California Press.  
Shapiro, Francine. 2018. *Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing \(EMDR\) Therapy, Third Edition.* New York\: The Guilford Press.  
Siegel, Daniel J., and Marion Solomon, ed. 2003. *Healing Trauma\: Attachment, Mind, Body, and Brain.* New York\: W.W. Norton & Company.  
Stephens, Greg J., Lauren J. Silbert, and Uri Hasson. 2010. “Speaker-listener neural coupling underlies successful communication.” *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 107\(32\)\: 14425-14430. https\://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2922522/.  
Stringer, Stephen, et.al. *Storying Training for Trainers.* WigTake Resources, LLC.  
Van Der Kolk, Bessel. 2015. *The Body Keeps the Score\: Mind, Brain and Body in the Transformation of Trauma.* Great Britain\: Penguin Books.  
Vander Lugt, Wesley. 2014. *Living Theodrama\: Reimagining Theological Ethics*. Ashgate Studies in Theology, Imagination and the Arts. Burlington\: Ashgate.  

Vanhoozer, Kevin J. 2005. *The Drama of Doctrine\: A Canonical-Linguistic Approach to Christian Theology*. Louisville\: Westminster John Knox Press.  

———. 2010. *Remythologizing Theology Divine Action, Passion, and Authorship*. Cambridge, UK; New York\: Cambridge University Press.  

Wolterstorff, Nicholas. 1995. *Divine Discourse\: Philosophical Reflections on the Claim That God Speaks*. Cambridge \[England\] ; New York, NY, USA\: Cambridge University Press.  

———. 2001\. “Living within a Text.” In *Faith and Narrative*, edited by Keith E. Yandell, vii, 271 p. Oxford New York\: Oxford University Press.  

Wright, N. T. 1992. *The New Testament and the People of God*. London\: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.  






